The measure of congeniality, another person
might characterize it as weakness, that in my
relationship to Scott and White, that I did not
insist on the classical control by academia of the
clinic. That was a crucial issue and it still is and
it isn't necessary. It can be gotten around. Am I
correct in feeling that both you and Dr. Brindley
were trying to figure out how to make it work? Yes,
sir. This is self-revisionism or self-whatever,
but there is no question that that was the attitude
100% of the time. That's what I always thought.
Yes. And... here on the campus did you feel that was
the attitude of Chancellor Williams and
President Miller and Vice President Prescott
absolutely absolutely I think they would have
agreed to anything that I had proposed they were so
anxious I don't anxious is not the right word
enthusiastic I don't want to use anxious because
it conveys a certain In the early months of your
work with Scott and White, do you remember any
specific examples of Dr. Brindley's help? It was
more subtle than that. He was such a towering
figure at Scott and White that merely the evidence
that he wanted to make it work was sufficient. I
think that that very likely
someone other than Dr. Brindley, I don't know the
past history of the institution very much, but
subsequently I don't think anyone else could have
carried it off with the authority,
and by authority I mean the personality
authority, the personal authority that Dr.
Brindley had that made it work. And his influence
with the trustees, I think he was the kingpin. Was
Olin Teague still our congressman? No, but Oliver
Meadows was another person, incidentally, whom
you might, I don't know whether Oliver is still
alive. He was ranching up in North Texas. Oliver
Meadows was the administrative assistant to Olin
Teague. And I think Oliver Meadows probably was
the genius behind the establishment of five new
medical schools under the auspices of the
Veterans Administration. And we were one of those
five. Indeed. That's Oliver Meadows. And he has
never received recognition for that,
incidentally. Teague, of course, would do
whatever his administrative assistant told him
to do, like any good congressman.
Were there, as you were working with the VA
hospital up there, who were the key people that you
worked with?
I remember one or two, but I don't remember their
names. There was one physician who was important,
Julian Acker, who is dead now, cancer of the lung,
he smoked a pipe and that sort of thing. But there
was a senior administrator. In the VA system,
there's a lay administrator who's really in
charge. The VA entered into the relationship with
a good deal of suspicion, feeling among other
things that we were a VA medical school and they
should be running things. And they had a long time
tense relationship with Scott and White. A
certain number of the Scott and White physicians
were consultants at the VA. There was an enormous
gradient of, what shall I say, skepticism about
the quality of medicine as between Scott and White
and the VA hospital, with some justification
probably at that time. So the VA hospital was
uncomfortable with the relationship with Scott
and White assuming the senior role, as it were.
Soon after you got here, did you develop a kind of a
game plan as to what you were, step by step, what you
were going to try to do? I think so, probably. I
never wrote it down. Can you describe kind of what
it was? Well, I wanted very much, and this proved to
not be doable. I wanted the medical school to be
part of the university. That's a cliche, but I
swear I wanted that. And it did not work. And it did
not work over again some traditional, highly
traditional academic values on the part of
faculty members, both here on campus and in the
medical school. I wanted very much to have,
just to be more integrated I guess really with the
rest of the university than the respective
colleges are in the university, more than
agriculture or engineering or science or
whatever. I thought that could be done and that was
part of a fairly popular current. at that time in
medical education. Never really accomplished.
One of the convincing, one of the reasons that the
LCME moved favorably on this medical school was
that it was to be on the university campus. It
wasn't going to be in Dallas. It was to be on the
campus. And that didn't work out. In trying to make
it work, who were your best allies? I suppose Dr.
Prescott and I don't remember the others. Were
there any deans that were? No, no the deans the
deans the ones that are most relevant wanted to
take over let's say chemistry biochemistry
wanted to take over biochemistry in a medical
school or the like and always veterinary medicine
was very
How shall I say that in the least prejudicial way?
Very skeptical. I don't remember whether you had a
veterinary school at Missouri or not. You did.
Well, perhaps by the time you were there, they were
good buddies. They were that close together, too.
But that was not a comfortable relationship. All
right. So one of the things you had to work on
quickly— was the second year yes and then the
clinical yes describe describe how that came
about
well i don't i at that time in in medical education
and maybe also in the university deans could be a
lot more autocratic than they can now And so I don't
remember that we, we didn't have any votes about
it, I'll tell you that. We didn't have a discussion
as to whether or not we should affiliate with Scott
and White and send students up there. All right.
Was there enough space here on the campus for the
first and second years? Yes. Okay. Yes. And they
primarily in the Teague and where else? I don't
remember. I know subsequently we got the old
Creamery. But I don't remember, oh I know, in the,
what was the old chemistry building,
what's the name of that, quite an old building, but
it was chemistry. We had space in there, kind of
reluctant, and I must say that when I went around
looking for space I didn't find a lot of
cooperation among deans, there was nobody.
They'd be glad to take over, but they weren't
willing to give up space to do it. And who were some
of your first key hires, your key additions? Very
few, because they had essentially all been hired.
Everybody was up at Scott and White, and the key
people were down here. So I can't claim to have made
any key hires. Do you remember when you first went
to the legislature to... do any lobbying?
Well,
while Dr. Miller was president and Mac Prescott, I
had no problem in talking with the, I get confused,
I've been in enough states, I think it was the BEF,
is there a BEF in Texas, Board of Educational
Finance? Coordinating Board. Coordinating
Board, but But the staff, what was the staff
called? Okay, anyhow, I could go to them and talk to
them privately and tell them what we needed. But
with Jarvis's resignation, there were barriers
set up immediately. I could no longer freelance as
I had in Oregon and particularly in New Mexico. New
Mexico, I got a cancer center established there. A
million dollars was an enormous amount of money in
New Mexico, and at that time, and I went before the
legislature, president didn't impede me or
anything, go to it, anything you can get, get. And I
said, we need a million dollars, we'll get
matching funds, we'll get three to one matching
funds. And one of the legislators asked me, said,
look, I'm all enthused about this, it's a lot of
money, but I want to know what you're going to do
with that building when we have a cure for cancer.
And that was a serious inquiry. He was doing his
job. Don't we wish that question had become
appropriate?
Yes. But the point of the anecdote is that in
Oregon, to a lesser extent, but in a place like New
Mexico where I'd had most of my experience, I had
free entree to the legislature, to the staff, and
at first down here I did. with the staff who were the
people who were most influential I don't mean to
uh... but oh and you know I got a lot of help from
uh... from uh... Billy Clayton he was a big help
uh... yes or or he had I'm not sure of the timing
precisely but uh... he was a big help and then
subsequently from the uh... uh... the the vice
governor the deputy governor Who? Lieutenant
Governor. Lieutenant Governor. The giant,
Bullock. Oh, Bob Bullock. Oh, well, Hobby, too. We
got good help from Hobby. Hobby and Bullock and
Bill Clayton were very supportive. And you know
another guy who was supportive, although
skeptical, I mean, playing his role of
skepticism, was Ken Ashworth. Are you going to
talk with Ken or talk with him? No, I want to very
much. Yes. were there any key now your program of
people that you're talking to is this based on some
mortality table well I am trying to talk to senior
people
you've talked to Mack have you yes
in that first year as you're getting ready for the
students for year three and four to move up to
Temple. You worked with Dr. Brindley. What
arrangements were made up there for them in the
first years?
We were able to persuade the Veterans
Administration to clean out, that was a
cantonment hospital, to empty a couple of
buildings and turn them into student quarters.
And we did not require that the students live
there, but they were very grateful for the
opportunity. The VA did a splendid job of fixing up
those living quarters for the students. Was that
arrangement to have both the VA and Scott and
White, was that comparatively special for the
Indian Medical School?
In a sense it was, but in a sense it was not.
the somewhere right after world war ii the end of
world war ii the veterans administration was
beleaguered by people who were skeptical about
the quality of care and so they established dean's
committees at the at all of the virtually all of the
va hospitals and dean chaired that committee and
it was really an oversight committee It was a
board, a medical board for the VA hospital. So they
were familiar with that.
And they were familiar from other VA hospitals
with the
way universities and medical schools appointed
their department heads chairman as the heads of
the services in the VA hospitals it was resented
but it was familiar
but here we were coming into an established
rather tense relationship and suddenly saying to
them okay from now on the chairman of surgery at
Scott and White is going to be the chief at surgery
at the VA hospital and is going to be on the dean's
committee. So that was resented. And that was new.
And in
general, they took that fairly well because we had
the leverage in Washington.
They got direction from Washington. Are there
some people at the VA who, in hindsight now,
deserve compliments for making it work? some
people in Temple
I think only Julian Acker the and the typical
student A&M medical student spent about how much
time at Scott and White compared to VA I can't be
precise I would say it might have been two-thirds
at the time at Scott and White it's a little
distorted because of course the VA hospital had no
pediatrics and no OB-GYN So naturally they had
those at Scott & White. The psychiatry service was
much more current at Scott & White than at the VA
where the issue was old men dying of emphysema and
cancer of the lung, alcoholics. Can you share with
this machine any examples of specific events or
incidents about The beginning up there, serious
or humorous?
Well, nothing comes to mind, Haskell. Nothing
where something in the middle of the road stopped
or went dead or somebody called? No. So that first
class up there, approximately 24? Yes. In number.
And do you remember how many of those graduated?
All of them. Was that unusual? No. That's not
unusual nationally?
I would say not again given the context of a new
medical school with a very small class. No, I don't
think so. And then when did the numbers increase
per class? Only after I left. I guess we went to 36
reluctantly. I was strongly opposed and am still
opposed to increasing the class size. I had
another one of my illusions was that we could have
an elitist medical school. My paradigm was
Dartmouth, which historically had been the first
two years for Harvard, to a lesser extent for Yale.
And always had had 24 students, of course. Under
that dream, would ours have gone somewhere for
their third and fourth year? No, to Scott and
White. That would have been all right. That would
have been acceptable. But to keep a very small
student body and to have very close attention to
everything
about them. As you were planning it, what was going
to be special about this medical school? I would
guess in the first instance and the biggest
disappointment was it would be part of the
university and I guess secondly was the pressure
within the there was pressure within the basic
science faculty here to get bigger they couldn't
understand why I didn't want to get larger why I
didn't want more students Why did they want it
bigger? Because everything is better if it's
bigger. The other disappointment that I had but I
had anticipated this and knew it would really be a
struggle was in the development of a true research
program at Scott and White and to have them put a
value and I mean now a financial value really on
research
in other words to be willing to give an individual
twenty five percent of his time free that he didn't
have to produce income clinical income to do
research were you planning on these students
these twenty four or so students were they also
going to be elite and quality well yeah I hope so how
were we going to recruit those in large measure
because of having twenty four students or thirty
six students and we did that at the beginning we did
We quickly became competitive, and there are some
fine medical schools here, I mean in Texas. Am I not
correct that they did quite well on their
national? Absolutely, outstanding,
outstanding. And we got the standard response
from the other faculties of the other medical
schools where you're teaching them to the
examination. Well, we can't do that. We were
teaching them. And they had confidence, and they
knew what they knew. And another thing that I felt,
and here I got a little bit of a problem with the
students to some extent, and this was a negative
factor in recruiting students, students who went
to Bentaube, I mean, Baylor, Bentaube or to,
what's the big hospital in Dallas? Baylor. No.
Parkland.
Students there knew that in their junior year they
were going to do brain surgery. And students knew
that they came to Texas A&M and Scott and White,
what they were going to do in their third year was
some blood counts and examine a patient under the
supervision of an experienced doctor and tell
them what was going on. The student was going to be a
student, not a young doctor. And that was a
negative. But that was another thing in my
old-fashioned
mind was that students were students and should be
students. Here in Bryan College Station, what was
the attitude of Scott and White and the other
medical... Well, Scott and White... I would say
that St. Joseph Maybe in the person of Sister,
what's her name? Kiwi, what's her name? Sister
something or other. Krenz, Kunz, Kunz, Kunz or
something. They didn't quite understand why we
didn't immediately open up to them, why we didn't
just appoint their doctors as professors and send
the medical students over, feeling that they
could just as well be educated at, they didn't
understand, simply did not understand that. and
that's common when you put a medical school in a new
environment all the doctors in town think that
they're professors and they'll teach the
students the real stuff were there some Brazos
County doctors that were particularly positive
in being members of the A&M medical team only
subsequently O.C. was one one who was kind of a
missed blessing was Harry Lipscomb He'd been on
the faculty at Baylor when Baylor was very much a
clinical school and still had those values. He was
of the same vintage then of Phil Davis when the
local doctors were the medical school. There were
one or two like that. Others were just kind of
indifferent. We didn't have much in the way of the
overt hostility that we found in at UCLA
particularly but also in Albuquerque where there
was real hostility. The principal reservation
that the medical community of Texas not alone of
College Station had about a relationship with
Scott and White was that Scott and White was a pinko
organization because it was a group practice and
group practice was borderline communistic.
the
was Scott and White almost unanimously
supportive no no no no no but again they didn't get
to vote on it they were really given the they were
given the option the physicians of either being
part of the teaching program or not and virtually
everybody opted to be part of the teaching program
and they quickly became proprietary
looking back on those years what did medical
education under your direction here what did A&M
do best and then what did it do least best in
medicine
the transition from Jarvis and Mac to the
succeeding hierarchies was not good and I
attributed it to the fact that the senior
administrators had had no experience with
medical education before had no concept of the way
in which I believe but I'll bet every dean in
engineering or agriculture or whatever believes
that we have a special culture I'm sure there's a
special culture in engineering they were more
used to that it seems to me that there was a there was
a could have been my paranoia but I really am pretty
level headed about that resentment that doctors
were rich and that we should have that really what
we ought to have is a national health care system
and that somehow we were a plutocratic
organization and arrogant and condescending.
Some of that was probably true, but that was
difficult. I think that it would have been better
if the several presidents and vice presidents had
had four or five years at the University of
Missouri first
or wherever and knew what accommodations could be
made to medicine and what the opportunities were.
What we missed, we just so badly missed it, was an
appreciation of
the value that a medical school could bring to a
university campus. I think that was never
understood. Can you think of any examples of where
an opportunity was missed because of that lack of
understanding?
I guess they were aborted so early. They were in a
pre-embryo state. Were you part of the planning of
the new medical building across the tracks? Oh
yes, yes. Describe how that came about.
There had developed during that time a paradigm
for basic medical sciences buildings they were to
be multifunctional laboratories were to be
multifunctional and we pretty much fit into that
mold I did not have the leverage that I believed
that I should have with the architects the
architects were similarly inexperienced in
medical education and really did not listen well
And the buildings and grounds people, whatever
the hell, colonel, general, whatever, some guy
who ran that thing, of course knew what buildings
should be. No concept at all about a medical
school. And so we were constrained, I think, in the
design more than we should have been.
General Peeler. Yes, yes, yes. Now you see for some
reason that didn't happen at UCLA and it didn't
happen at New Mexico. Somehow people there were
more freewheeling or maybe I well and certainly in
New Mexico I had an opportunity to be part of and to
observe it and participate less so because I was so
junior at UCLA. But those, well, UCLA, the
president at UCLA at that time was Murphy, who was a
physician, subsequently became chairman of the
board of the Los Angeles Times. And at New Mexico,
we had Mr. Popejoy, who had no doctorate, was Mr.
Popejoy, and he was a Williams, a kindly old
gentleman, benevolent, wonderful, supportive,
a whole different kind of old-fashioned way of
doing things. If you could have planned the
building entirely as you wanted it, what would
that medical facility have included that it does
not? What would you have done differently? I think
I know I would have wanted more commons area for the
students. I would have wanted it to be more
congenial from the standpoint of students
lounging around and talking to each other and
interacting with each other and to some extent
with the faculty. Even something in the way of a
snack bar, of something to soften it in that way.
What about in terms of its facilities?
construction and laboratory not that bad we
probably would have arranged them differently
but kind of cut and dried I mean out of somebody's
book as the building was constructed it was
designed for classes of what size I think 48 I
believe and we're now at 64 yeah so theoretically
we're yes there was another thing happening not
alone in our medical school in medical education
with the animal rights people and sentimentality
and that kind of thing the nature of laboratories
changed physiology particularly so that the
needs and demands on laboratories were much less
and even the conviction in medical education that
students ought to experience. There was a better,
there was more utilization of, it wasn't, it was
the advent of computers or of simulated
experiments and the like rather than the actual
hands-on doing of experiments. So that those
changes in medical education have made it doable
to have 64 students in there. It's become somewhat
more didactic.